https://excalidraw.com/#json=KRBUjBXTswI4n0p13tBIt,a-wdExjPVQWzpmXhL0qMBQ


Low-Level Design: Inventory Management System 🏗️
An inventory management system is designed to efficiently track, manage, and optimize product inventory within a business. 
The system needs to handle multiple products, track stock levels, process orders, and ensure timely replenishment. 
The system should be able to accommodate different product types, handle various inventory operations, and provide accurate reporting.


Rules of the System:
Setup:
• The business has multiple warehouses and can store multiple product types.
• Products can be added, removed, or transferred between warehouses.
• Each product has attributes like SKU(Stock Keeping Unit - Unique Id of a Product), name, price, and quantity.
• The system tracks inventory levels and triggers alerts for low stock.‍

Operation:

• Users can add new products to the inventory.
• Stock levels are updated when products are received or shipped.
• The system generates reports on inventory status and movement.
• Inventory can be searched and filtered based on various criteria.


Safety Features:
• Threshold alerts prevent stockouts.
• Audit trails track all inventory changes.
• Access control limits who can perform different inventory operations.

‍

Interview Setting 🤝

Point 1: Introduction and Vague Problem Statement:

Interviewer: Let's start with a basic problem statement. Design an Inventory Management System.

Candidate: Certainly! Here's my understanding of the Inventory Management System:

• The system will manage multiple products across different warehouses.

• Users can add, remove, and transfer inventory items.

• The system tracks stock levels and alerts on low inventory.

• Reports can be generated for inventory analysis.

• The system should be scalable to handle businesses of different sizes.

Is this the expected flow?

Interviewer: Yes, you are aligned with the flow. Please continue ahead.

Candidate: Great! Before diving into the design, I'd like to clarify a few requirements:

• What types of products should the system support?

• Are there specific inventory replenishment (restoration of stock) strategies to implement?

• How should the system handle product categorization?

‍

Point 2: Clarifying Requirements :

Interviewer: We want a system that:

• Supports multiple product types in multiple warehouses.

• Handles both inventory additions and removals.

• Efficiently notifies when stock levels are low.

‍

Candidate: To summarize, the key requirements are:

• A system with multiple warehouses and product categories.

• Stock level tracking and management.

• Intelligent replenishment strategy implementation.

• Ability to handle edge cases like damaged inventory or returns.

Interviewer: Perfect, let's proceed.

‍

Point 3: Identifying Key Components/Entities:

Candidate: Now that we have the requirements, let's identify the key components of our Inventory Management System:

Product: Represents individual products in inventory.

• Class: Product

• Description: This class represents individual products with their attributes.

‍

Java
public class Product {
    private String sku;
    private String name;
    private double price;
    private int quantity;
    private int threshold;
    private ProductCategory category;
}
‍

Warehouse: Contains products and manages storage.

• Class: Warehouse

Description: This class represents physical storage locations.

‍

Java
public class Warehouse {
    private int id;
    private String name;
    private String location;
    private Map<String, Product> products; // SKU -> Product	    
    public void addProduct(Product product, int quantity);
    public void removeProduct(String sku, int quantity);
    public int getAvailableQuantity(String sku);
}
‍

InventoryManager: Manages inventory operations and tracking.

• Class: InventoryManager

Description: This class handles inventory operations and uses the Singleton pattern.

‍

Java
public class InventoryManager {
    private static InventoryManager instance;
    private List<Warehouse> warehouses;
    private ProductFactory productFactory;
    private List<InventoryObserver> observers;
    private ReplenishmentStrategy replenishmentStrategy;
}
‍

Interviewer: That sounds good. Let's proceed with the design details.

‍

Point 4: Design Challenges:
Interviewer: What design challenges do you anticipate?

‍

Candidate: The key challenges for the Inventory Management System include:

1. Scalability: Handling large numbers of products and warehouses.

2. Concurrency: Managing multiple simultaneous inventory operations.

3. Data Consistency: Ensuring accurate inventory counts across the system.

4. Customizable Replenishment: Supporting different replenishment strategies.

5. Edge Cases: Handling product returns, damaged inventory, and seasonal demand fluctuations.

Point 5: Approach:
Interviewer: How would you approach these challenges?

‍

Candidate: I propose using design patterns effectively. Here are my strategies:

1. Singleton Pattern for Inventory Manager: 

• Ensures a single point of control for inventory operations.

• Maintains consistency across the system.

2. Observer Pattern for Inventory Alerts: 

• Notifies relevant stakeholders when stock falls below thresholds.

• Enables real-time inventory monitoring.

‍

3. Factory Pattern for Product Creation:

• Encapsulates product creation logic.

• Allows for easy addition of new product types.

‍

4. Strategy Pattern for Replenishment: 

• Enables different replenishment strategies.

• Can switch between algorithms based on product type or season.

‍

5. State Management with Enums: 

• To effectively manage product categories and operations, we'll use enums.

‍

Java
public enum ProductCategory { 
     ELECTRONICS, CLOTHING, GROCERY, FURNITURE, OTHER 
}

public enum InventoryOperation { 
     ADD, REMOVE, TRANSFER, ADJUST 
}
‍

Interviewer: That sounds like a solid approach. Let's delve into the implementation details.

‍

Point 6: Implementation:
Interviewer: Ready to discuss implementation?

‍

Candidate: Yes. I'll focus on implementing the design patterns we discussed and show how they work together in the Inventory Management System:

